Awesome, okay, so
we just did a lot on that HelloWorld API.
And there's probably some things if
you've never built an API before,
they were like, what.
I don't know how a lot
of this stuff works.
So, I was trying to be
vague as much as I can, so
I can actually get to this point on
this page and not have to be moved.
But, let's talk about a little bit.
So, every API ever shares a common makeup.
It really doesn't matter what
the language or the environment is.
So if you've ever built anything
else with like Laravel or Django or
Rails, it really doesn't matter.
They all have the same little
parts that that make them up.
So I wanna talk about those parts.
The first one is the server, okay, so we
just made a server that had an API, okay.
The API is the code that runs on
the server, they're two different things.
But people use them synonymously,
when you hear people say API or
people say server they're talking about
the same thing, they're one in the same.
But technically they're
two different things.
You can have a server
that doesn't have an API.
And I guess technically,
you could have an API that doesn't
have a server [LAUGH] now you can.
But, they are definitely
two different things.
A server is basically an app that
has no visual representation and
is always running, right.
So you might be using an app in
the browser that has some type of UI but
a server is also an app,
it just doesn't have a visual
thing the way you look at a service
through the logs of a terminal.
That's the server's visual output, right.
It's usually connected to a network and
shared amongst many different clients, so
other UIs, web apps, mobile apps,
other services, or the servers.
Servers usually sit in front of a database
and facilitates access to that database.
That's the main use case I would say for
most servers, it's literally a gatekeeper.
It's like the people that sit,
a bouncer at a club and
the club the database basically,
that's what a server is.
And that bouncer has its own
rules on what he wants to do and
they never get off they just work there
24/7, they just never have time off.
That's basically the server is.
And basically in order to do that,
there's some little networking things
that are involved with servers.
So, one thing is that servers
must operate on a port.
So if I go back to the code that we just
wrote, this number here, that's a port.
This is a port on your computer.
And you can think of a port almost like a
port in a ship dock, it's kinda the same.
It basically, is just like some number,
typically four digits,
sometimes five digits.
But it's like a virtual place on
your computer's operating system,
where network connections start and end.
So, you cannot interface with
anything on a network without
it being attached to a port.
Just like you can't interface with
your boat unless you pull into a port,
no one's gonna come unload stuff
unless you pull into the port,
that's the way that you
connect to the network.
So you need a port and
it has to be unique.
You can't have more than
one thing on the same port.
In fact,
you'll get an error if you try to do that.
If I tried to start another server right
now, on 3001 while another one's running,
it will say no, that ports being used
right now someone's already parked there.
So you can't, pick another number, okay.
And then you have something
like an IP address.
So an IP address is that unique location
of where the server is located on
the network.
You can think of it as
the address to your home.
It's unique,
that's how the Mill and UPS and
FedEx that's how they find you
because you have a unique address.
If your address wasn't unique, and
someone else had the same address as you,
how do they know which
one to deliver it to?
That will be weird, right.
So an IP address is unique on
the network that it's on and
the internet is the biggest
network in the world.
So, every IP address on
the internet has to be unique.
On locally right now,
it only has to be unique for
your computer so
it's less sensitive there.
But basically an IP address just helps
traffic go to and from a specific device
whereas a port allows targeting of
specific services or apps on that device.
So, if I wanna locate a computer,
like google.com, this would be
an alias for their IP address.
This will take me to their server.
And what you don't know is that there
actually is a port here called 80,
is that most browsers just take that
away cuz it's always 80, but it's there.
And 80 is the port on Google server that's
gonna show me the HTML page that shows
me the Google search box.
That's what they decided to put there.
So when I go there,
I'm connecting to that service.
But locally, they might have other ports
that have other services that they use,
whether we have access to them or not.
So yeah, that's ports, that's IP
addresses and it looks like this.
So, you can see here this
will be an IP address.
This is actually the IP address for
a localhost,
which is the server running
on your computer right now.
Everyone has a server on their computers
called localhost and that's the Alias.
But the official IP address
forward is this and
then everything after
the code is the port.
>> Just wanted to confirm,
I think localhost is usually 127.
>> Is it 127, what did I put?
>> You got 121.
>> Yeah, it is 127, you're right, damn.
All right, and then, a route.
Let's talk about routes.
So, a route is a unique combination
of a URL path and an HTTP method.
So routes are used to
locate certain resources or
trigger certain actions on an API.
And basically, you can think of them as,
if you're on the front end and
click is the name of an event,
a route is the name of the event.
And it's a combination of
the path you wanna go to plus
the HTTP method that you're trying to do,
okay.
So, an examples of methods are the least
the most common ones that are built into
HTTP are GET, so we did GET that's
the one that we check for in our server,
we check for a get request.
Typically it's used to show intent of,
I wanna get information from API.
Then there's POST, POST is typically used
to mutate or create information on API.
Usually there's some data
being sent along with it.
Then there's PUT,
PUT is usually used to be for
replacing existing information on API.
It also has data typically
sent along with it.
PATCH is like PUT but
it doesn't replace it, it just updates it.
So, it doesn't actually
swap something out.
It just changes something a little but it
also usually has data sent along with it.
And then DELETE is exactly
what it sounds like.
It's typically used for deleting things
off of an API, some information.
And then you have this
other one called OPTIONS.
This one is used by something called CORS,
we'll talk about CORS, but it's basically
browsers are like super sketchy about
allowing you to talk to other APIs.
So they implemented this security check
to make sure you have permission to talk
to the API.
That security check is called CORS and
the way they do that is by
sending up some HB medical options
basically it's like, hey Mr.
API, what are your options for
this client trying to talk to you?
And that's what that is.
So, those are the most
common HTTP methods.
There's more, but
I doubt you'll ever use them.
You're probably only ever use these and
you probably won't even use OPTIONS.
You're probably only ever use, GraphQL
you're only ever to use this or this.
You wanna use anything else.
It depends on what you're doing.
But for the most part,
this is what HTTP is made of.
And here's an example what
a route will look like.
So a route, I said,
it's a combination of a method and a path.
So in this case, this is a GET request
to whatever your URL is/api/user/1.
Another example would be POST
to whatever your URL is/ food.
And that is the unique combination
that triggers an event.
So really an API is about registering
all of these unique URL combinations and
then creating functions
that respond to them.
It's literally an event based application.
And the tough part about this is that,
engineers just do whatever they want.
Even though we talked about
these methods in these routes.
Yeah, that's true for pretty much every
single server and server technology.
But that doesn't mean
engineers wanna do it,
some people just don't even
respect they gets to the POST.
They might treat a POST like a GET,
they might treat a DELETE like a POST.
There's nothing stopping
you from doing it.
You can do whatever you want.
It's your code, that's why we have come up
with different design patterns for API.
So we can all agree that hey,
if you adopt this design pattern,
I should expect your API
to work a certain way.
And the most popular one is called REST.
And we're gonna be
talking about REST here.
There's others like gRPC, GraphQL, and
Protobuf, that do different things,
but we'll be talking
about REST in this one.
And how loose it is
because it is very loose.
I don't think anyone does REST
the way that you're supposed to do it.
I don't think he can.
I don't think it's possible,
in my opinion.
But, we're gonna try it.
Last one here is route handlers.
So, what is a route handler?
A route handler is this,
this callback right here.
That's a route handler.
It's just a function that responds
to an event just like a handler for
a click event or a hover event.
That's basically what it is.
Typically what you do in a route handlers,
this is where you would
talk to the database.
This is where all the magic happens.
This is the thing you're trying
to protect is the route handler.
So, that's why you have
a server in the first place.
Cause if you think about how a client
works, when we all go to the same website,
we all get our own
version of that website.
But, when each version of that
website talks to the server,
we're all talking to the same server.
There's only one server for
all of the copies of the website
that we're looking at.
So the server needs to be able to respond
to all of us and that's how it does it by
having a route handler responding to
each and one of our individual requests.
And I think that's the different approach
coming from front end is that you gotta
realize you're not building an app for
one user, you're building an app for
every user.
Every user ever is gonna
use this at the same time.
And it has to respond to that and
it's a different concern.